Project Gutenberg's The Children of the New Forest, by Captain Marryat
The circumstances which I am about to relate to my juvenile readers
took place in the year 1647. By referring to the history of England, of
that date, they will find that King Charles the First, against whom the
Commons of England had rebelled, after a civil war of nearly five
years, had been defeated, and was confined as a prisoner at Hampton

Edward then returned to the other room, and recollected, or, rather,
was reminded, that he had had no supper, and it was now nearly dawn of
and never discover such a hiding-place." Edward walked round by the
side of the thicket, to find out the track by which the robbers had
"He still sleeps, I believe. The question is, whether you should ride
over with the pony, or walk, and leave Pablo to return with the pony
and cart; for I will not take the boy away, or leave the house myself,
without removing the property which belongs to the boy, and of which I
will make inquiry when he awakes. Besides, there is money, by what the
robbers stated in my hearing, which of course must be taken care of for
him."
"By whose hand did that man fall?" said the intendant.
Edward and Pablo pulled the body of the robber on one side of the
doorway, and threw over it some dried fern which lay by; they then
backed the cart down to the door; the iron chest was first got in, then
all the heavy articles, such as armor, guns, and books, etc., and by
that time the cart was more than half loaded. Edward then went into the
chamber, and brought out the packages the boy had made up, and put them
all in the cart until it was loaded high up; they brought out some
blankets, and laid over all to keep things steady; and then Edward told
the boy that all was ready, and that they had better go.
"Then listen to me: your father is safe from all persecution now; he
is, I trust, in heaven; and you they can not touch, as you have done
nothing to offend them; but still they will take possession of your
father's property as soon as they know of his death, and find out who
he was. This, for your sake I wish to prevent them from doing, and have
therefore sent for the cart, that I may remove to my cottage every
Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:
thing that is of value, that it may be held for your benefit; some day
if he could be of service to Mrs. Beverley. The colonel would have
persuaded Jacob to have altogether taken up his residence at the
mansion, but to this the old man objected. He had been all his life
under the greenwood tree, and could not bear to leave the forest. He
promised the colonel that he would watch over his family, and ever be
at hand when required; and he kept his word. The death of Colonel
"If born and bred in this forest, James Southwold," said the leader of
the troop, "you must fain know all its mazes and paths. Now, call to
mind, are there no secret hiding-places in which people may remain
concealed; no thickets which may cover both man and horse? Peradventure
thou mayest point out the very spot where this man Charles may be
hidden?"
"I do know one dell, within a mile of Arnwood," replied James
he was. This, for your sake I wish to prevent them from doing, and have