Project Gutenberg's The Children of the New Forest, by Captain Marryat

The circumstances which I am about to relate to my juvenile readers
took place in the year 1647. By referring to the history of England, of
that date, they will find that King Charles the First, against whom the
Commons of England had rebelled, after a civil war of nearly five
years, had been defeated, and was confined as a prisoner at Hampton


Edward then returned to the other room, and recollected, or, rather,
was reminded, that he had had no supper, and it was now nearly dawn of

and never discover such a hiding-place." Edward walked round by the
side of the thicket, to find out the track by which the robbers had

"He still sleeps, I believe. The question is, whether you should ride
over with the pony, or walk, and leave Pablo to return with the pony
and cart; for I will not take the boy away, or leave the house myself,
without removing the property which belongs to the boy, and of which I
will make inquiry when he awakes. Besides, there is money, by what the
robbers stated in my hearing, which of course must be taken care of for
him."

"By whose hand did that man fall?" said the intendant.

Edward and Pablo pulled the body of the robber on one side of the
doorway, and threw over it some dried fern which lay by; they then
backed the cart down to the door; the iron chest was first got in, then
all the heavy articles, such as armor, guns, and books, etc., and by
that time the cart was more than half loaded. Edward then went into the
chamber, and brought out the packages the boy had made up, and put them
all in the cart until it was loaded high up; they brought out some
blankets, and laid over all to keep things steady; and then Edward told
the boy that all was ready, and that they had better go.

"Then listen to me: your father is safe from all persecution now; he
is, I trust, in heaven; and you they can not touch, as you have done
nothing to offend them; but still they will take possession of your
father's property as soon as they know of his death, and find out who
he was. This, for your sake I wish to prevent them from doing, and have
therefore sent for the cart, that I may remove to my cottage every

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:
thing that is of value, that it may be held for your benefit; some day
if he could be of service to Mrs. Beverley. The colonel would have
persuaded Jacob to have altogether taken up his residence at the
mansion, but to this the old man objected. He had been all his life
under the greenwood tree, and could not bear to leave the forest. He
promised the colonel that he would watch over his family, and ever be
at hand when required; and he kept his word. The death of Colonel
"If born and bred in this forest, James Southwold," said the leader of
the troop, "you must fain know all its mazes and paths. Now, call to
mind, are there no secret hiding-places in which people may remain
concealed; no thickets which may cover both man and horse? Peradventure
thou mayest point out the very spot where this man Charles may be
hidden?"

"I do know one dell, within a mile of Arnwood," replied James
Southwold, "which might cover double our troop from the eyes of the
most wary."

"We will ride there, then," replied the leader. "Arnwood, sayest thou?
is not that the property of the Malignant Cavalier Beverley, who was
shot down at Naseby?"

"Even so," replied Southwold; "and many is the time--that is, in the
olden time, before I was regenerated--many is the day of revelry that I
have passed there; many the cup of good ale that I have quaffed."

Before Jacob is admitted to the presence of Miss Judith Villiers, we
must give some account of the establishment at Arnwood. With the
exception of one male servant, who officiated in the house and stable
as his services might be required, every man of the household of
Colonel Beverley had followed the fortunes of their master, and as none
had returned, they, in all probability had shared his fate. Three
female servants, with the man above mentioned, composed the whole
household. Indeed, there was every reason for not increasing the
establishment, for the rents were either paid in part, or not paid at
all. It was generally supposed that the property, now that the
"So I should presume, Jacob Armitage, neither shall I accept your
offer. It would ill befit the dignity of a Villiers to be frightened
out of her abode by a party of rude soldiers. Happen what will, I shall
not stir from this--no, not even from this chair. Neither do I consider
the danger so great as you suppose. Let Benjamin saddle, and be
prepared to ride over to Lymington immediately. I will give him a
letter to the magistrate there, who will send us protection."

"But, madam, the children can not remain here. I will not leave them
here. I promised the colonel--"
"Well, then, be it so; take them to your cottage, and take Martha to
attend upon the Miss Beverleys. Go down now, and desire Agatha to come
to me, and Benjamin to saddle as fast as he can."

Jacob left the room, satisfied with the permission to remove the
children. He knew that it was useless to argue with Miss Judith, who
was immovable when once she had declared her intentions. He was
debating in his own mind whether he should acquaint the servants with
the threatened danger; but he had no occasion to do so, for Agatha had
remained at the door while Jacob was communicating the intelligence,
and as soon as he had arrived at that portion of it by which she
learned that the mansion was to be burned down that night, had run off
to the kitchen to communicate the intelligence to the other servants.
"I'll not stay to be burned to death," exclaimed the cook, as Jacob
came in. "Well, Mr. Armitage, this is pretty news you have brought.
What does my lady say!"

"She desires that Benjamin saddles immediately, to carry a letter to
Lymington; and you, Agatha, are to go up stairs to her."

"But what does she mean to do? Where are we to go?" exclaimed Agatha.

"Miss Judith intends to remain where she is."

"Then she will remain alone, for me," exclaimed the housemaid, who was
admired by Benjamin. "Its bad enough to have little victuals and no
wages, but as for being burned to death--Benjamin, put a pillion behind
your saddle, and I'll go to Lymington with you. I won't be long in
getting my bundle."
"Oh no, we don't want her," said Humphrey; "Alice always dresses Edith
and herself too, ever since mamma died."

"Now we will carry down the bundles, and you make them fast on the pony
while I go for your sisters."

"But where does aunt Judith go?" inquired Edward.

"She will not leave the house, Master Edward; she intends to stay and
speak to the troopers."

"And so an old woman like her remains to face the enemy, while I run
away from them!" replied Edward. "I will not go."

"Well, Master Edward," replied Jacob, "you must do as you please; but
it will be cruel to leave your sisters here; they and Humphrey must
come with me, and I can not manage to get them to the cottage without
you go with us; it is not far, and you can return in a very short time."

To this Edward consented. The pony was soon loaded, and the little
girls, who were still playing in the garden, were called in by
Humphrey. They were told that they were going to pass the night in the
cottage, and were delighted at the idea.

"Now, Master Edward," said Jacob, "will you take your sisters by the
hand and lead them to the cottage? Here is the key of the door; Master
Humphrey can lead the pony; and Master Edward," continued Jacob, taking
him aside, "I'll tell you one thing which I will not mention before
your brother and sisters: the troopers are all about the New Forest,
for King Charles has escaped, and they are seeking for him. You must
not, therefore, leave your brother and sisters till I return. Lock the
cottage-door as soon as it is dark. You know where to get a light, over
the cupboard; and my gun is loaded, and hangs above the mantlepiece.
You must do your best if they attempt to force an entrance; but above
all, promise me not to leave them till I return. I will remain here to
see what I can do with your aunt, and when I come back we can then
decide how to act."

This latter ruse of Jacob's succeeded. Edward promised that he would
not leave his sisters, and it wanted but a few minutes of twilight when
the little party quitted the mansion of Arnwood. As they went out of
the gates they were passed by Benjamin, who was trotting away with
Martha behind him on a pillion, holding a bundle as large as herself.
Not a word was exchanged, and Benjamin and Martha were soon out of
sight.
"But you were not shooting the deer, were you, sir?" inquired Patience.

"No, I was not; nor have I killed any since last I saw you."

"I am glad that I can say that to my father," replied Patience; "it
will much please him. He said to me that he thought you capable of much
higher employment than any that could be offered here, and only wished
to know what you would accept. He has interest--great
interest--although just now at variance with the rulers of this
country, on account of the--"

"Murder of the king, you would or you should have said, Mistress
Patience. I have heard how much he was opposed to that foul deed, and I
honor him for it."

"How kind, how truly kind you are to say so!" said Patience, the tears
starting in her eyes; "what pleasure to hear my father's conduct
praised by you!"

"Why, of course, Mistress Patience, all of my way of thinking must
praise him. Your father is in London, I hear?"

"Yes, he is; and that reminds me that you must want some refreshment
after your walk. I will call Phoebe." So saying, Patience left the room.

The fact was, Mistress Patience was reminded that she had been sitting
with a young man some time, and alone with him--which was not quite
proper in those times; and when Phoebe appeared with the cold viands,
she retreated out of hearing, but remained in the room.

Edward partook of the meal offered him in silence, Patience occupying
herself with her work, and keeping her eyes fixed on it, unless when
she gave a slight glance at the table to see if any thing was required.
When the meal was over, Phoebe removed the tray, and then Edward rose
to take his leave.

"Nay, do not go yet--I have much to say first; let me again ask you how
we can serve you."

"I never can take any office under the present rulers of the nation, so
that question is at rest."

"I was afraid that you would answer so," replied Patience, gravely: "do
not think I blame you; for many are there already who would gladly
retrace their steps if it were possible. They little thought, when they
opposed the king, that affairs would have ended as they have done.
Where do you live, sir?"

"At the opposite side of the forest, in a house belonging to me now,
but which was inherited by my grandfather."

"Do you live alone--surely not?"
to it. It depends upon you to release them eventually from their false
position; and you can never have such an opening as is now offered you,
by one whose gratitude alone will make him anxious to serve you."

"You are right, Humphrey, and I will accept the offer; I can but return
to you if things do not go on well."

"I thank you sincerely for your decision, Edward," replied Humphrey.
"What a sweet girl that Patience Heatherstone is! I think I never saw
such an enchanting smile!"

Edward thought of the smile she gave him when they parted but an hour
ago, and agreed with Humphrey, but he replied--

"Why, brother, you are really in love with the intendant's daughter."

"Not so, my dear brother; but I am in love with her goodness and
sweetness of disposition, and so are Alice and Edith, I can tell you.
She has promised to come over and see them, and bring them flowers for
their garden, and I hardly know what; and I am very glad of it, as my
sisters have been buried here so long, that they can not but gain by
her company now and then. No! I will leave Mistress Heatherstone for
you; I am in love with little Clara."

"Not a bad choice, Humphrey: we both aspire high, for two young
foresters, do we not? However, they say 'Every dog has his day,' and
Cromwell and his Parliament may have theirs. King Charles may be on his
throne again now, long before you catch a forest pony, Humphrey."

"I hope he will, Edward; but recollect how you laughed at the idea of
my catching a cow--you may be surprised a second time. 'Where there is
a will there is a way,' the saying is. But I must go and help Alice
with the heifer: she is not very quiet yet, and I see her going out
with her pail."

The brothers then parted, and Edward then walked about, turning over in
his mind the events of the day, and very often finding his thoughts
broken in upon by sudden visions of Patience Heatherstone--and
certainly the remembrance of her was to him the most satisfactory and
pleasing portion of the prospect in his offered situat
Now I am miserable, and, whichever way I turn, I see no prospect of
being otherwise. One thing only I can decide upon, which is, that I
will not remain any longer than I can help under this roof. I will go
over and consult with Humphrey; and if I can only place my sisters as I
want, Humphrey and I will seek our fortunes."

Edward rose at daylight, and, dressing himself, went down and saddled
his horse. Desiring Sampson to tell the intendant that he had gone over
to the cottage and would return by the evening, he rode across the
forest, and arrived just as they were sitting down to breakfast. His
attempts to be cheerful before his sisters did not succeed, and they
were all grieved to see him look so pale and haggard. As soon as
breakfast was over, Edward made a sign, and he and Humphrey went out.

"What is the matter, my dear brother?" said Humphrey.
"Where there is such a sense of propriety there can be little
affection."

"I know nothing about these things, Edward," replied Humphrey; "but I
have been told that a woman's heart is not easily read; or if I have
not been told it, I have read it or dreamed it."

"What do you propose to do?"

"What I fear you will not approve of, Humphrey; it is to break up our
establishment altogether. If the answer is favorable from the Misses
Conynghame my sisters shall go to them; but that we had agreed upon
already. Then for myself--I intend to go abroad, resume my name, and
obtain employment in some foreign service. I will trust to the king for
assisting me to that."

"That is the worst part of it, Edward; but if your peace of mind
depends upon it, I will not oppose it."

"You, Humphrey, may come with me and share my fortunes, or do what you
think more preferable."

"I think then, Edward, that I shall not decide rashly. I must have
remained here with Pablo if my sisters had gone to the Ladies
Conynghame and you had remained with the intendant; I shall, therefore,
till I hear from you, remain where I am, and shall be able to observe
what is going on here, and let you know."

"Be it so," replied Edward; "let me only see my sisters well placed,
and I shall be off the next day. It is misery to remain there now."

After some more conversation, Edward mounted his horse and returned to
the intendant's. He did not arrive till late, for supper was on the
table. The intendant gave him a letter for Mr. Chaloner, which was
inclosed in one from Mr. Langton; and further informed Edward that news
had arrived of the king having made his escape to France.