Project Gutenberg's The Children of the New Forest, by Captain Marryat

The circumstances which I am about to relate to my juvenile readers
took place in the year 1647. By referring to the history of England, of
that date, they will find that King Charles the First, against whom the
Commons of England had rebelled, after a civil war of nearly five
years, had been defeated, and was confined as a prisoner at Hampton


Edward then returned to the other room, and recollected, or, rather,
was reminded, that he had had no supper, and it was now nearly dawn of

and never discover such a hiding-place." Edward walked round by the
side of the thicket, to find out the track by which the robbers had

"He still sleeps, I believe. The question is, whether you should ride
over with the pony, or walk, and leave Pablo to return with the pony
and cart; for I will not take the boy away, or leave the house myself,
without removing the property which belongs to the boy, and of which I
will make inquiry when he awakes. Besides, there is money, by what the
robbers stated in my hearing, which of course must be taken care of for
"I am also going north," replied Edward, "and am anxious to get there
as soon as I can."

"With your permission we will ride together," said the stranger. "I
shall be the gainer, as I shall feel that I have one with me who is to
be trusted to in case of any further attacks during our journey."

There was such a gentlemanlike, frank, and courteous air about the
stranger, that Edward immediately assented to his proposal, of their
riding in company for mutual protection. He was a powerful, well-made
man, of apparently about one or two-and-twenty, remarkably handsome in
person, dressed richly, but not gaudily, in the Cavalier fashion, and
wore a hat with a feather. As they proceeded, they entered into
conversation on indifferent matters for some time, neither party
attempting by any question to discover who his companion might be.
Edward had more than once, when the conversation flagged for a minute,
considered what reply he should give in case his companion should ask
him the cause of his journey, and at last had made up his mind what to
say.

A little before noon they pulled up to bait their horses at a small
village; the stranger observing that he avoided St. Alban's, and all
other large towns, as he did not wish to satisfy the curiosity of
people, or to have his motions watched; and therefore, if Edward had no
objection, he knew the country so well, that he could save time by
allowing him to direct their path. Edward was, as may be supposed, very
agreeable to this, and, during their whole journey, they never entered
a town, except they rode through it after dark; and put up at humble
inns on the roadside, where, if not quite so well attended to, at all
events they were free from observation.

It was, however, impossible that this reserve could continue long, as
they became more and more intimate every day. At last the stranger said,

"Master Armitage, we have traveled together for some time,
interchanging thoughts and feelings, but with due reserve as respects
ourselves and our own plans. Is this to continue? If so, of course you
have but to say so; but if you feel inclined to trust me, I have the
same feeling toward you. By your dress I should imagine that you
belonged to a party to which I am opposed; but your language and
manners do not agree with your attire; and I think a hat and feathers
would grace that head better than the steeple-crowned affair which now
covers it. It may be that the dress is only assumed as a disguise: you
know best. However, as I say, I feel confidence in you, to whatever
party you may belong, and I give you credit for your prudence and
reserve in these troubled times. I am a little older than you, and may
advise you; and I am indebted to you, and can not therefore betray
you--at least I trust you believe so."

"By whose hand did that man fall?" said the intendant.

Edward and Pablo pulled the body of the robber on one side of the
doorway, and threw over it some dried fern which lay by; they then
backed the cart down to the door; the iron chest was first got in, then
all the heavy articles, such as armor, guns, and books, etc., and by
that time the cart was more than half loaded. Edward then went into the
chamber, and brought out the packages the boy had made up, and put them
all in the cart until it was loaded high up; they brought out some
blankets, and laid over all to keep things steady; and then Edward told
the boy that all was ready, and that they had better go.

"Then listen to me: your father is safe from all persecution now; he
is, I trust, in heaven; and you they can not touch, as you have done
nothing to offend them; but still they will take possession of your
father's property as soon as they know of his death, and find out who
he was. This, for your sake I wish to prevent them from doing, and have
therefore sent for the cart, that I may remove to my cottage every

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:
thing that is of value, that it may be held for your benefit; some day

On the evening of the second day, they were close to the metropolis,
and Sampson pointed out to Edward St. Paul's Cathedral and Westminster
Abbey, and other objects worthy of note.

"It is this: I have a presentiment, I know not why, that you are about
to encounter danger. If so, be prudent--be prudent for the sake of your
dear sisters--be prudent for the sake of all your friends, who would
regret you--promise me that."

On the evening of the second day, they were close to the metropolis,
and Sampson pointed out to Edward St. Paul's Cathedral and Westminster
Abbey, and other objects worthy of note.

"I have," replied Ed ward, opening his doublet, and showing his pistols.

"That's right, sir. Will you take any thing before you go to bed?"

"Indeed I will, for I am hungry; any thing will do, with a pint of
wine."

"And he told me in one of his former letters that he had the daughter
of our poor friend Ratcliffe with him. Is it not so?"

"My advice, then, is to leave London immediately. I will give you
letters to some friends of mine in Lancashire and Yorkshire; in either
county you can remain unnoticed, and make what preparations you think
necessary. But do nothing in haste--consult well, and be guided by
them, who will, if it is considered advisable and prudent, join with
you in your project. I need say no more. Call upon me to-morrow
morning, an hour before noon, and I will have letters ready for you."


"Going north, sir?" inquired the same person when Edward returned.

"Not exactly," replied Edward, walking to the window to avoid further
conversation.

"The Roundhead is on the stilts," observed another of the party.

"Yes," replied the first; "it is easy to see that he has not been
accustomed to be addressed by gentlemen; for half a pin I would slit
his ears!"
