Project Gutenberg's The Children of the New Forest, by Captain Marryat

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Children of the New Forest

Author: Captain Marryat

Posting Date: January 14, 2013 [EBook #6471]
Release Date: September, 2004
First Posted: December 18, 2002

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHILDREN OF THE NEW FOREST ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team.










THE CHILDREN OF THE NEW FOREST.

BY CAPT. MARRYAT, R.N.



1864.



CHAPTER I.


The circumstances which I am about to relate to my juvenile readers
took place in the year 1647. By referring to the history of England, of
that date, they will find that King Charles the First, against whom the
Commons of England had rebelled, after a civil war of nearly five
years, had been defeated, and was confined as a prisoner at Hampton
Court. The Cavaliers, or the party who fought for King Charles, had all
been dispersed and the Parliamentary army under the command of Cromwell
were beginning to control the Commons.

It was in the month of November in this year that King Charles,
accompanied by Sir John Berkely, Ashburnham, and Legg, made his escape
from Hampton Court, and rode as fast as the horses could carry them
toward that part of Hampshire which led to the New Forest. The king
expected that his friends had provided a vessel in which he might
escape to France, but in this he was disappointed. There was no vessel
ready, and after riding for some time along the shore, he resolved to
go to Titchfield, a seat belonging to the Earl of Southampton. After a
long consultation with those who attended him, he yielded to their
advice, which was, to trust to Colonel Hammond, who was governor of the
Isle of Wight for the Parliament, but who was supposed to be friendly
to the king. Whatever might be the feelings of commiseration of Colonel
Hammond toward a king so unfortunately situated, he was firm in his
duties toward his employers, and the consequence was that King Charles
found himself again a prisoner in Carisbrook Castle.

But we must now leave the king and retrace history to the commencement
of the civil war. A short distance from the town of Lymington, which is
not far from Titchfield, where the king took shelter, but on the other
side of Southampton Water, and south of the New Forest, to which it
adjoins, was a property called Arnwood, which belonged to a Cavalier of
the name of Beverley. It was at that time a property of considerable
value, being very extensive, and the park ornamented with valuable
timber; for it abutted on the New Forest, and might have been supposed
to have been a continuation of it. This Colonel Beverley, as we must
call him, for he rose to that rank in the king's army, was a valued
friend and companion of Prince Rupert, and commanded several troops of
cavalry. He was ever at his side in the brilliant charges made by this
gallant prince, and at last fell in his arms at the battle of Naseby.
Colonel Beverley had married into the family of the Villiers, and the
issue of his marriage was two sons and two daughters; but his zeal and
sense of duty had induced him, at the commencement of the war, to leave
his wife and family at Arnwood, and he was fated never to meet them
again. The news of his death had such an effect upon Mrs. Beverley,
already worn with anxiety on her husband's account, that a few months
afterward she followed him to an early tomb, leaving the four children
under the charge of an elderly relative, till such time as the family
of the Villiers could protect them; but, as will appear by our history,
this was not at that period possible. The life of a king and many other
lives were in jeopardy, and the orphans remained at Arnwood, still
under the care of their elderly relation, at the time that our history
commences.

The New Forest, my readers are perhaps aware, was first inclosed by
William the Conqueror as a royal forest for his own amusement--for in
those days most crowned heads were passionately fond of the chase; and
they may also recollect that his successor, William Rufus, met his
death in this forest by the glancing of an arrow shot by Sir Walter
Tyrrell. Since that time to the present day it has continued a royal
domain. At the period of which we are writing, it had an establishment
of verderers and keepers, paid by the crown, amounting to some forty or
fifty men. At the commencement of the civil war they remained at their
posts, but soon found, in the disorganized state of the country, that
their wages were no longer to be obtained; and then, when the king had
decided upon raising an army, Beverley, who held a superior office in
the Forest, enrolled all the young and athletic men who were employed
in the Forest, and marched them away with him to join the king's army.
Some few remained, their age not rendering their services of value, and
among them was an old and attached servant of Beverley, a man above
sixty years of age, whose name was Jacob Armitage, and who had obtained
the situation through Colonel Beverley's interest. Those who remained
in the Forest lived in cottages many miles asunder, and indemnified
themselves for the non-payment of their salaries by killing the deer
for sale and for their own subsistence.

The cottage of Jacob Armitage was situated on the skirts of the New
Forest, about a mile and a half from the mansion of Arnwood; and when
Colonel Beverley went to join the king's troops, feeling how little
security there would be for his wife and children in those troubled
times, he requested the old man, by his attachment to the family, not
to lose sight of Arnwood, but to call there as often as possible to see
if he could be of service to Mrs. Beverley. The colonel would have
persuaded Jacob to have altogether taken up his residence at the
mansion, but to this the old man objected. He had been all his life
under the greenwood tree, and could not bear to leave the forest. He
promised the colonel that he would watch over his family, and ever be
at hand when required; and he kept his word. The death of Colonel
Beverley was a heavy blow to the old forester, and he watched over Mrs.
Beverley and the orphans with the greatest solicitude; but when Mrs.
Beverley followed her husband to the tomb, he then redoubled his
attentions, and was seldom more than a few hours at a time away from
the mansion. The two boys were his inseparable companions, and he
instructed them, young as they were, in all the secrets of his own
calling. Such was the state of affairs at the time that King Charles
made his escape from Hampton Court; and I now shall resume my narrative
from where it was broken off.

As soon as the escape of Charles I. was made known to Cromwell and the
Parliament, troops of horse were dispatched in every direction to the
southward, toward which the prints of the horses' hoofs proved that he
had gone. As they found that he had proceeded in the direction of the
New Forest, the troops were subdivided and ordered to scour the forest,
in parties of twelve to twenty, while others hastened down to
Southampton, Lymington, and every other seaport or part of the coast
from which the king might be likely to embark. Old Jacob had been at
Arnwood on the day before, but on this day he had made up his mind to
procure some venison, that he might not go there again empty-handed;
for Miss Judith Villiers was very partial to venison, and was not slow
to remind Jacob, if the larder was for many days deficient in that
meat. Jacob had gone out accordingly; he had gained his leeward
position of a fine buck, and was gradually nearing him by stealth--now
behind a huge oak tree, and then crawling through the high fern, so as
to get within shot unperceived, when on a sudden the animal, which had
been quietly feeding, bounded away and disappeared in the thicket. At
the same time Jacob perceived a small body of horse galloping through
the glen in which the buck had been feeding. Jacob had never yet seen
the Parliamentary troops, for they had not during the war been sent
into that part of the country, but their iron skull-caps, their buff
accouterments, and dark habiliments assured him that such these must
be; so very different were they from the gayly-equipped Cavalier
cavalry commanded by Prince Rupert. At the time that they advanced,
Jacob had been lying down in the fern near to some low black-thorn
bushes; not wishing to be perceived by them, he drew back between the
bushes, intending to remain concealed until they should gallop out of
sight; for Jacob thought, "I am a king's forester, and they may
consider me as an enemy, and who knows how I may be treated by them?"
But Jacob was disappointed in his expectations of the troops riding
past him; on the contrary, as soon as they arrived at an oak tree
within twenty yards of where he was concealed, the order was given to
halt and dismount; the sabers of the horsemen clattered in their iron
sheaths as the order was obeyed, and the old man expected to be
immediately discovered; but one of the thorn bushes was directly
between him and the troopers, and effectually concealed him. At last
Jacob ventured to raise his head and peep through the bush; and he
perceived that the men were loosening the girths of their black horses,
or wiping away the perspiration from their sides with handfuls of fern.

A powerfully-formed man, who appeared to command the others, was
standing with his hand upon the arched neck of his steed, which
appeared as fresh and vigorous as ever, although covered with foam and
perspiration. "Spare not to rub down, my men," said he, "for we have
tried the mettle of our horses, and have now but one half-hour's
breathing-time. We must be on, for the work of the Lord must be done."

"They say that this forest is many miles in length and breadth,"
observed another of the men, "and we may ride many a mile to no
purpose; but here is James Southwold, who once was living in it as a
verderer; nay, I think that he said that he was born and bred in these
woods. Was it not so, James Southwold?"

"It is even as you say," replied an active-looking young man; "I was
born and bred in this forest, and my father was a verderer before me."

Jacob Armitage, who listened to the conversation, immediately
recognized the young man in question. He was one of those who had
joined the king's army with the other verderers and keepers. It pained
him much to perceive that one who had always been considered a frank,
true-hearted young man, and who left the forest to fight in defense of
his king, was now turned a traitor, and had joined the ranks of the
enemy; and Jacob thought how much better it had been for James
Southwold, if he had never quitted the New Forest, and had not been
corrupted by evil company; "he was a good lad," thought Jacob, "and now
he is a traitor and a hypocrite."

"If born and bred in this forest, James Southwold," said the leader of
the troop, "you must fain know all its mazes and paths. Now, call to
mind, are there no secret hiding-places in which people may remain
concealed; no thickets which may cover both man and horse? Peradventure
thou mayest point out the very spot where this man Charles may be
hidden?"

"I do know one dell, within a mile of Arnwood," replied James
Southwold, "which might cover double our troop from the eyes of the
most wary."

"We will ride there, then," replied the leader. "Arnwood, sayest thou?
is not that the property of the Malignant Cavalier Beverley, who was
shot down at Naseby?"

"Even so," replied Southwold; "and many is the time--that is, in the
olden time, before I was regenerated--many is the day of revelry that I
have passed there; many the cup of good ale that I have quaffed."

"And thou shalt quaff it again," replied the leader. "Good ale was not
intended only for Malignants, but for those who serve diligently. After
we have examined the dell which thou speakest of, we will direct our
horses' heads toward Arnwood."

"Who knows but what the man Charles may be concealed in the Malignant's
house?" observed another.

"In the day I should say no," replied the leader; "but in the night the
Cavaliers like to have a roof over their heads; and, therefore, at
night, and not before, will we proceed thither."

"I have searched many of their abodes," observed another, "but search
is almost in vain. What with their spring panels, and secret doors,
their false ceilings, and double walls, one may ferret forever, and
find nothing."

"Yes," replied the leader, "their abodes are full of these popish
abominations; but there is one way which is sure; and if the man
Charles be concealed in any house, I venture to say that I will find
him. Fire and smoke will bring him forth; and to every Malignant's
house within twenty miles will I apply the torch; but it must be at
night, for we are not sure of his being housed during the day. James
Southwold, thou knowest well the mansion of Arnwood?"

"I know well my way to all the offices below--the buttery, the cellar,
and the kitchen; but I can not say that I have ever been into the
apartments of the upper house."

"That it needeth not; if thou canst direct us to the lower entrance it
will be sufficient."

"That can I, Master Ingram," replied Southwold, "and to where the best
ale used to be found."

"Enough, Southwold, enough; our work must be done, and diligently. Now,
my men, tighten your girths; we will just ride to the dell: if it
conceals not whom we seek, it shall conceal us till night, and then the
country shall be lighted up with the flames of Arnwood, while we
surround the house and prevent escape. Levelers, to horse!"

The troopers sprung upon their saddles, and went off at a hard trot,
Southwold leading the way. Jacob remained among the fern until they
were out of sight, and then rose up. He looked for a short time in the
direction in which the troopers had gone, stooped down again to take up
his gun, and then said, "There's providence in this; yes, and there's
providence in my not having my dog with me, for he would not have
remained quiet for so long a time. Who would ever have thought that
James Southwold would have turned a traitor! more than traitor, for he
is now ready to bite the hand that has fed him, to burn the house that
has ever welcomed him. This is a bad world, and I thank Heaven that I
have lived in the woods. But there is no time to lose;" and the old
forester threw his gun over his shoulder, and hastened away in the
direction of his own cottage.

"And so the king has escaped," thought Jacob, as he went along, "and he
may be in the forest! Who knows but he may be at Arnwood, for he must
hardly know where to go for shelter? I must haste and see Miss Judith
immediately. 'Levelers, to horse!' the fellow said. What's a Leveler?"
thought Jacob.

As perhaps my readers may ask the same question, they must know that a
large proportion of the Parliamentary army had at this time assumed the
name of Levelers, in consequence of having taken up the opinion that
every man should be on an equality, and property should be equally
divided. The hatred of these people to any one above them in rank or
property, especially toward those of the king's party, which mostly
consisted of men of rank and property, was unbounded, and they were
merciless and cruel to the highest degree, throwing off much of that
fanatical bearing and language which had before distinguished the
Puritans. Cromwell had great difficulty in eventually putting them
down, which he did at last accomplish by hanging and slaughtering many.
Of this Jacob knew nothing; all he knew was, that Arnwood was to be
burned down that night, and that it would be necessary to remove the
family. As for obtaining assistance to oppose the troopers, that he
knew to be impossible. As he thought of what must take place, he
thanked God for having allowed him to gain the knowledge of what was to
happen, and hastened on his way. He had been about eight miles from
Arnwood when he had concealed himself in the fern. Jacob first went to
his cottage to deposit his gun, saddled his forest pony, and set off
for Arnwood. In less than two hours the old man was at the door of the
mansion; it was then about three o'clock in the afternoon, and being in
the month of November, there was not so much as two hours of daylight
remaining. "I shall have a difficult job with the stiff old lady,"
thought Jacob, as be rung the bell; "I don't believe that she would
rise out of her high chair for old Noll and his whole army at his back.
But we shall see."




CHAPTER II.


Before Jacob is admitted to the presence of Miss Judith Villiers, we
must give some account of the establishment at Arnwood. With the
exception of one male servant, who officiated in the house and stable
as his services might be required, every man of the household of
Colonel Beverley had followed the fortunes of their master, and as none
had returned, they, in all probability had shared his fate. Three
female servants, with the man above mentioned, composed the whole
household. Indeed, there was every reason for not increasing the
establishment, for the rents were either paid in part, or not paid at
all. It was generally supposed that the property, now that the
Parliament had gained the day, would be sequestrated, although such was
not yet the case; and the tenants were unwilling to pay, to those who
were not authorized to receive, the rents which they might be again
called upon to make good. Miss Judith Villiers, therefore, found it
difficult to maintain the present household; and although she did not
tell Jacob Armitage that such was the case, the fact was, that very
often the venison which he brought to the mansion was all the meat that
was in the larder. The three female servants held the offices of cook,
attendant upon Miss Villiers, and housemaid; the children being under
the care of no particular servant, and left much to themselves. There
had been a chaplain in the house, but he had quitted before the death
of Mrs. Beverley, and the vacancy had not been filled up; indeed, it
could not well be, for the one who left had not received his salary for
many months, and Miss Judith Villiers, expecting every day to be
summoned by her relations to bring the children and join them, sat in
her high chair waiting for the arrival of this summons, which, from the
distracted state of the times, had never come.

As we have before said, the orphans were four in number; the two eldest
were boys, and the youngest were girls. Edward, the eldest boy, was
between thirteen and fourteen years old; Humphrey, the second, was
twelve; Alice, eleven; and Edith, eight. As it is the history of these
young persons which we are about to narrate, we shall say little about
them at present, except that for many months they had been under little
or no restraint, and less attended to. Their companions were Benjamin,
the man who remained in the house, and old Jacob Armitage, who passed
all the time he could spare with them. Benjamin was rather weak in
intellect, and was a source of amusement rather than otherwise. As for
the female servants, one was wholly occupied with her attendance on
Miss Judith, who was very exacting, and had a high notion of her own
consequence. The other two had more than sufficient employment; as,
when there is no money to pay with, every thing must be done at home.
That, under such circumstances, the boys became boisterous and the
little girls became romps, is not to be wondered at: but their having
become so was the cause of Miss Judith seldom admitting them into her
room. It is true that they were sent for once a day, to ascertain if
they were in the house, or in existence, but soon dismissed and left to
their own resources. Such was the neglect to which these young orphans
was exposed. It must, however, be admitted, that this very neglect made
them independent and bold, full of health from constant activity, and
more fitted for the change which was so soon to take place.

"Benjamin," said Jacob, as the other came to the door, "I must speak
with the old lady."

"Have you brought any venison, Jacob?" said Benjamin, grinning, "else,
I reckon, you'll not be over welcome."

"No, I have not; but it is an important business, so send Agatha to her
directly."

"I will; and I'll not say any thing about the venison."

In a few minutes, Jacob was ushered up by Agatha into Miss Judith
Villiers's apartment. The old lady was about fifty years of age, very
prim and starched, sitting in a high-backed chair, with her feet upon a
stool, and her hands crossed before her, her black mittens reposing
upon her snow-white apron.

The old forester made his obeisance.

"You have important business with us, I am told," observed Miss Judith.

"Most important, madam," replied Jacob. "In the first place, it is
right that you should be informed that his majesty, King Charles, has
escaped from Hampton Court."

"His majesty escaped!" replied the lady.

"Yes; and is supposed to be secreted somewhere in this neighborhood.
His majesty is not in this house, madam, I presume?"

"Jacob, his majesty is not in this house: if he were, I would suffer my
tongue to be torn out sooner than I would confess it, even to you."

"But I have more for your private ear, madam."

"Agatha, retire; and Agatha, be mindful that you go down stairs, and do
not remain outside the door."

Agatha, with this injunction, bounced out of the room, slamming-to the
door so as to make Miss Judith start from her seat.

"Ill-mannered girl!" exclaimed Miss Judith. "Now, Jacob Armitage, you
may proceed."

Jacob then entered into the detail of what he had overheard that
morning, when he fell in with the troopers, concluding with the
information, that the mansion would be burned down that very night. He
then pointed out the necessity of immediately abandoning the house, as
it would be impossible to oppose the troopers.

"And where am I to go to, Jacob?" said Miss Judith, calmly.

"I hardly know, madam; there is my cottage; it is but a poor place, and
not fit for one like you."

"So I should presume, Jacob Armitage, neither shall I accept your
offer. It would ill befit the dignity of a Villiers to be frightened
out of her abode by a party of rude soldiers. Happen what will, I shall
not stir from this--no, not even from this chair. Neither do I consider
the danger so great as you suppose. Let Benjamin saddle, and be
prepared to ride over to Lymington immediately. I will give him a
letter to the magistrate there, who will send us protection."

"But, madam, the children can not remain here. I will not leave them
here. I promised the colonel--"

"Will the children be in more danger than I shall be, Jacob Armitage?"
replied the old lady, stiffly. "They dare not ill-treat me--they may
force the buttery and drink the ale--they may make merry with that and
the venison which you have brought with you, I presume, but they will
hardly venture to insult a lady of the House of Villiers."

"I fear they will venture any thing, madam. At all events, they will
frighten the children, and for one night they will be better in my
cottage."

"Well, then, be it so; take them to your cottage, and take Martha to
attend upon the Miss Beverleys. Go down now, and desire Agatha to come
to me, and Benjamin to saddle as fast as he can."

Jacob left the room, satisfied with the permission to remove the
children. He knew that it was useless to argue with Miss Judith, who
was immovable when once she had declared her intentions. He was
debating in his own mind whether he should acquaint the servants with
the threatened danger; but he had no occasion to do so, for Agatha had
remained at the door while Jacob was communicating the intelligence,
and as soon as he had arrived at that portion of it by which she
learned that the mansion was to be burned down that night, had run off
to the kitchen to communicate the intelligence to the other servants.

"I'll not stay to be burned to death," exclaimed the cook, as Jacob
came in. "Well, Mr. Armitage, this is pretty news you have brought.
What does my lady say!"

"She desires that Benjamin saddles immediately, to carry a letter to
Lymington; and you, Agatha, are to go up stairs to her."

"But what does she mean to do? Where are we to go?" exclaimed Agatha.

"Miss Judith intends to remain where she is."

"Then she will remain alone, for me," exclaimed the housemaid, who was
admired by Benjamin. "Its bad enough to have little victuals and no
wages, but as for being burned to death--Benjamin, put a pillion behind
your saddle, and I'll go to Lymington with you. I won't be long in
getting my bundle."

Benjamin, who was in the kitchen with the maids at the time that Jacob
entered, made a sign significant of consent, and went away to the
stable. Agatha went up to her mistress in a state of great
perturbation, and the cook also hurried away to her bedroom.

"They'll all leave her," thought Jacob; "well, my duty is plain; I'll
not leave the children in the house." Jacob then went in search of
them, and found them playing in the garden. He called the two boys to
him, and told them to follow him.

"Now, Mr. Edward," said he, "you must prove yourself your father's own
son. We must leave this house immediately; come up with me to your
rooms, and help me to pack up yours and your sisters' clothes, for we
must go to my cottage this night. There is no time to be lost."

"But why, Jacob; I must know why?"

"Because the Parliamentary troopers will burn it down this night."

"Burn it down! Why, the house is mine, is it not? Who dares to burn
down this house?"

"They will dare it, and will do it."

"But we will fight them, Jacob; we can bolt and bar; I can fire a gun,
and hit too, as you know; then there's Benjamin and you."

"And what can you and two men do against a troop of horse, my dear boy?
If we could defend the place against them, Jacob Armitage would be the
first; but it is impossible, my dear boy. Recollect your sisters. Would
you have them burned to death, or shot by these wretches? No, no, Mr.
Edward; you must do as I say, and lose no time. Let us pack up what
will be most useful, and load White Billy with the bundles; then you
must all come to the cottage with me, and we will make it out how we
can."

"That will be jolly!" said Humphrey; "come, Edward."

But Edward Beverley required more persuasion to abandon the house; at
last, old Jacob prevailed, and the clothes were put up in bundles as
fast as they could collect them.

"Your aunt said Martha was to go with your sisters, but I doubt if she
will," observed Jacob, "and I think we shall have no room for her, for
the cottage is small enough."

"Oh no, we don't want her," said Humphrey; "Alice always dresses Edith
and herself too, ever since mamma died."

"Now we will carry down the bundles, and you make them fast on the pony
while I go for your sisters."

"But where does aunt Judith go?" inquired Edward.

"She will not leave the house, Master Edward; she intends to stay and
speak to the troopers."

"And so an old woman like her remains to face the enemy, while I run
away from them!" replied Edward. "I will not go."

"Well, Master Edward," replied Jacob, "you must do as you please; but
it will be cruel to leave your sisters here; they and Humphrey must
come with me, and I can not manage to get them to the cottage without
you go with us; it is not far, and you can return in a very short time."

To this Edward consented. The pony was soon loaded, and the little
girls, who were still playing in the garden, were called in by
Humphrey. They were told that they were going to pass the night in the
cottage, and were delighted at the idea.

"Now, Master Edward," said Jacob, "will you take your sisters by the
hand and lead them to the cottage? Here is the key of the door; Master
Humphrey can lead the pony; and Master Edward," continued Jacob, taking
him aside, "I'll tell you one thing which I will not mention before
your brother and sisters: the troopers are all about the New Forest,
for King Charles has escaped, and they are seeking for him. You must
not, therefore, leave your brother and sisters till I return. Lock the
cottage-door as soon as it is dark. You know where to get a light, over
the cupboard; and my gun is loaded, and hangs above the mantlepiece.
You must do your best if they attempt to force an entrance; but above
all, promise me not to leave them till I return. I will remain here to
see what I can do with your aunt, and when I come back we can then
decide how to act."

This latter ruse of Jacob's succeeded. Edward promised that he would
not leave his sisters, and it wanted but a few minutes of twilight when
the little party quitted the mansion of Arnwood. As they went out of
the gates they were passed by Benjamin, who was trotting away with
Martha behind him on a pillion, holding a bundle as large as herself.
Not a word was exchanged, and Benjamin and Martha were soon out of
sight.

"Why, where can Martha be going?" said Alice. "Will she be back when we
come home to-morrow?"

Edward made no reply, but Humphrey said, "Well, she has taken plenty of
clothes in that huge bundle for one night, at least."

Jacob, as soon as he had seen the children on their way, returned to
the kitchen, where he found Agatha and the cook collecting their
property, evidently bent upon a hasty retreat.

"Have you seen Miss Judith, Agatha?"

"Yes; and she told me that she should remain, and that I should stand
behind her chair that she might receive the troopers with dignity; but
I don't admire the plan. They might leave her alone, but I am sure that
they will be rude to me."

"When did Benjamin say he would be back?"

"He don't intend coming back. He said he would not, at all events, till
to-morrow morning, and then he would ride out this way, to ascertain if
the report was false or true. But Martha has gone with him."

"I wish I could persuade the old lady to leave the house," said Jacob,
thoughtfully. "I fear they will not pay her the respect that she
calculates upon. Go up, Agatha, and say I wish to speak with her."

"No, not I; I must be off, for it is dark already."

"And where are you going, then?"

"To Gossip Allwood's. It's a good mile, and I have to carry my things."

"Well, Agatha, if you'll take me up to the old lady, I'll carry your
things for you."

Agatha consented, and as soon as she had taken up the lamp, for it was
now quite dark, Jacob was once more introduced.

"I wish, madam," said Jacob, "you would be persuaded to leave the house
for this night."

"Jacob Armitage, leave this house I will not, if it were filled with
troopers; I have said so."

"But, madam--"

"No more, sir; you are too forward," replied the old lady, haughtily.

"But, madam--"

"Leave my presence, Jacob Armitage, and never appear again. Quit the
room, and send Agatha here."

"She has left, madam, and so has the cook, and Martha went away behind
Benjamin; when I leave, you will be alone."

"They have dared to leave?"

"They dared not stay, madam."

"Leave me, Jacob Armitage, and shut the door when you go out." Jacob
still hesitated. "Obey me instantly," said the old lady; and the
forester, finding all remonstrance useless, went out, and obeyed her
last commands by shutting the door after him.

Jacob found Agatha and the other maid in the court-yard; he took up
their packages, and, as he promised, accompanied them to Gossip
Allwood, who kept a small ale-house about a mile distant.

"But, mercy on us! what will become of the children?" said Agatha, as
they walked along, her fears for herself having up to this time made
her utterly forgetful of them. "Poor things! and Martha has left them."

"Yes, indeed; what will become of the dear babes?" said the cook, half
crying.

Now Jacob, knowing that the children of such a Malignant as Colonel
Beverley would have sorry treatment if discovered, and knowing also
that women were not always to be trusted, determined not to tell them
how they were disposed of. He therefore replied,

"Who would hurt such young children as those? No, no, they are safe
enough; even the troopers would protect them."

"I should hope so," replied Agatha.

"You may be sure of that; no man would hurt babies," replied Jacob.
"The troopers will take them with them to Lymington, I suppose. I've no
fear for them; it's the proud old lady whom they will be uncivil to."

The conversation here ended, and in due time they arrived at the inn.
Jacob had just put the bundles down on the table, when the clattering
of horses' hoofs was heard. Shortly afterward, the troopers pulled
their horses up at the door, and dismounted. Jacob recognized the party
he had met in the forest, and among them Southwold. The troopers called
for ale, and remained some time in the house, talking and laughing with
the women, especially Agatha, who was a very good-looking girl. Jacob
would have retreated quietly, but he found a sentinel posted at the
door to prevent the egress of any person. He reseated himself, and
while he was listening to the conversation of the troopers he was
recognized by Southwold, who accosted him. Jacob did not pretend not to
know him, as it would have been useless; and Southwold put many
questions to him as to who were resident at Arnwood. Jacob replied that
the children were there, and a few servants, and he was about to
mention Miss Judith Villiers, when a thought struck him--he might save
the old lady.

"You are going to Arnwood, I know," said Jacob, "and I have heard who
you are in search of. Well, Southwold, I'll give you a hint. I may be
wrong; but if you should fall in with an old lady or something like one
when you go to Arnwood, mount her on your crupper and away with her to
Lymington as fast as you can ride. You understand me?" Southwold nodded
significantly, and squeezed Jacob's hand.

"One word, Jacob Armitage; if I succeed in the capture by your means,
it is but fair that you should have something for your hint. Where can
I find you the day after to-morrow?"

"I am leaving the country this night, and I must go. I am in trouble,
that's the fact; when all is blown over, I will find you out. Don't
speak to me any more just now." Southwold again squeezed Jacob's hand,
and left him. Shortly afterward the order was given to mount, and the
troopers set off.

Armitage followed slowly and unobserved. They arrive at the mansion and
surrounded it. Shortly afterward he perceived the glare of torches, and
in a quarter of an hour more thick smoke rose up in the dark but clear
sky; at last the flames burst forth from the lower windows of the
mansion, and soon afterward they lighted up the country round to some
distance.

"It is done," thought Jacob; and he turned to bend his hasty steps
toward his own cottage, when he heard the galloping of a horse and
violent screams; a minute afterward James Southwold passed him with the
old lady tied behind him, kicking and struggling as hard as she could.
Jacob smiled as he thought that he had by his little stratagem saved
the old woman's life, for that Southwold imagined that she was King
Charles dressed up as an old woman was evident; and he then returned as
fast as he could to the cottage.

In half an hour Jacob had passed through the thick woods which were
between the mansion and his own cottage, occasionally looking back, as
the flames of the mansion rose higher and higher, throwing their light
far and wide. He knocked at the cottage-door; Smoker, a large dog
cross-bred between the fox and blood-hound, growled till Jacob spoke to
him, and then Edward opened the door.

"My sisters are in bed and fast asleep, Jacob," said Edward, "and
Humphrey has been nodding this half hour; had he not better go to bed
before we go back?"

"Come out, Master Edward," replied Jacob, "and look." Edward beheld the
flames and fierce light between the trees and was silent.

"I told you that it would be so, and you would all have been burned in
your beds, for they did not enter the house to see who was in it, but
fired it as soon as they had surrounded it."

"And my aunt!" exclaimed Edward, clasping his hands.

"Is safe, Master Edward, and by this time at Lymington."

"We will go to her to-morrow."

"I fear not; you must not risk so much, Master Edward. These Levelers
spare nobody, and you had better let it be supposed that you are all
burned in the house."

"But my aunt knows the contrary, Jacob."

"Very true; I quite forgot that." And so Jacob had. He expected that
the old woman would have been burned, and then nobody would have known
of the existence of the children; he forgot, when he planned to save
her, that she knew where the children were.

"Well, Master Edward, I will go to Lymington to-morrow and see the old
lady; but you must remain here, and take charge of your sisters till I
come back, and then we will consider what is to be done. The flames are
not so bright as they were."

"No. It is my house that these Roundheads have burned down," said
Edward, shaking his fist.

"It was your house, Master Edward, and it was your property, but how
long it will be so remains to be seen. I fear that it will be
forfeited."

"Wo to the people who dare take possession of it!" cried Edward; "I
shall, if I live, be a man one of these days."

"Yes, Master Edward, and then you will reflect more than you do now,
and not be rash. Let us go into the cottage, for it's no use remaining
out in the cold; the frost is sharp to-night."

Edward slowly followed Jacob into the cottage. His little heart was
full. He was a proud boy and a good boy, but the destruction of the
mansion had raised up evil thoughts in his heart--hatred to the
Covenanters, who had killed his father and now burned the
property--revenge upon them (how he knew not); but his hand was ready
to strike, young as he was. He lay down on the bed, but he could not
sleep. He turned and turned again, and his brain was teeming with
thoughts and plans of vengeance. Had he said his prayers that night he
would have been obliged to repeat, "Forgive us as we forgive them who
trespass against us." At last, he fell fast asleep, but his dreams were
wild, and he often called out during the night and woke his brother and
sisters.




CHAPTER III.


The next morning, as soon as Jacob had given the children their
breakfast, he set off toward Arnwood. He knew that Benjamin had stated
his intention to return with the horse and see what had taken place,
and he knew him well enough to feel sure that he would do so. He
thought it better to see him if possible, and ascertain the fate of
Miss Judith. Jacob arrived at the still smoking ruins of the mansion,
and found several people there, mostly residents within a few miles,
some attracted by curiosity, others busy in collecting the heavy masses
of lead which had been melted from the roof, and appropriating them to
their own benefit; but much of it was still too hot to be touched, and
they were throwing snow on it to cool it, for it had snowed during the
night. At last, Jacob perceived Benjamin on horseback riding leisurely
toward him, and immediately went up to him.

"Well, Benjamin, this is a woeful sight. What is the news from
Lymington?"

"Lymington is full of troopers, and they are not over-civil," replied
Benjamin. "And the old lady--where is she?"

"Ah, that's a sad business," replied Benjamin, "and the poor children,
too. Poor Master Edward! he would have made a brave gentleman."

"But the old lady is safe," rejoined Jacob. "Did you see her?"

"Yes, I saw her; they thought she was King Charles--poor old soul."

"But they have found out their mistake by this time?"

"Yes, and James Southwold has found it out too," replied Benjamin; "to
think of the old lady breaking his neck!"

"Breaking his neck? You don't say so! How was it?"

"Why, it seems that Southwold thought that she was King Charles dressed
up as an old woman, so he seized her and strapped her fast behind him,
and galloped away with her to Lymington; but she struggled and kicked
so manfully, that he could not hold on, and off they went together, and
he broke his neck."

"Indeed! A judgment--a judgment upon a traitor," said Jacob.

"They were picked up, strapped together as they were, by the other
troopers, and carried to Lymington."

"Well, and where is the old lady, then? Did you see and speak to her?"

"I saw her, Jacob, but I did not speak to her. I forgot to say that,
when she broke Southwold's neck, she broke her own too."

"Then the old lady is dead?"

"Yes, that she is," replied Benjamin; "but who cares about her? it's
the poor children that I pity. Martha has been crying ever since."

"I don't wonder."

"I was at the Cavalier, and the troopers were there, and they were
boasting of what they had done, and called it a righteous work. I could
not stand that, and I asked one of them if it were a righteous work to
burn poor children in their beds? So he turned round, and struck his
sword upon the floor, and asked me whether I was one of them--'Who are
you, then?' and I--all my courage went away, and I answered, I was a
poor rat-catcher. 'A rat-catcher; are you? Well, then, Mr. Ratcatcher,
when you are killing rats, if you find a nest of young ones, don't you
kill them too? or do you leave them to grow, and become mischievous,
eh?' 'I kill the young ones, of course,' replied I. 'Well, so do we
Malignants whenever we find them.' I didn't say a word more, so I went
out of the house as fast as I could."

"Have you heard any thing about the king?" inquired Jacob.

"No, nothing; but the troopers are all out again, and, I hear, are gone
to the forest."

"Well, Benjamin, good-by, I shall be off from this part of the
country--it's no use my staying here. Where's Agatha and cook?"

"They came to Lymington early this morning."

"Wish them good-by for me, Benjamin."

"Where are you going, then?"

"I can't exactly say, but I think London way. I only staid here to
watch over the children; and now that they are gone, I shall leave
Arnwood forever."

Jacob, who was anxious, on account of the intelligence he had received
of the troopers being in the forest, to return to the cottage, shook
hands with Benjamin, and hastened away. "Well," thought Jacob, as he
wended his way, "I'm sorry for the poor old lady, but still, perhaps,
it's all for the best. Who knows what they might do with these
children! Destroy the nest as well as the rats, indeed! they must find
the nest first." And the old forester continued his journey in deep
thought.

We may here observe that, blood-thirsty as many of the Levelers were,
we do not think that Jacob Armitage had grounds for the fears which he
expressed and felt; that is to say, we believe that he might have made
known the existence of the children to the Villiers family, and that
they would never have been harmed by any body. That by the burning of
the mansion they might have perished in the flames, had they been in
bed, as they would have been at that hour, had he not obtained
intelligence of what was about to be done, is true; but that there was
any danger to them on account of their father having been such a stanch
supporter of the king's cause, is very unlikely, and not borne out by
the history of the times: but the old forester thought otherwise; he
had a hatred of the Puritans, and their deeds had been so exaggerated
by rumor, that he fully believed that the lives of the children were
not safe. Under this conviction, and feeling himself bound by his
promise to Colonel Beverley to protect them, Jacob resolved that they
should live with him in the forest, and be brought up as his own
grandchildren. He knew that there could be no better place for
concealment; for, except the keepers, few people knew where his cottage
was; and it was so out of the usual paths, and so imbosomed in lofty
trees, that there was little chance of its being seen, or being known
to exist. He resolved, therefore, that they should remain with him till
better times; and then he would make known their existence to the other
branches of the family, but not before. "I can hunt for them, and
provide for them," thought he, "and I have a little money, when it is
required; and I will teach them to be useful; they must learn to
provide for themselves. There's the garden, and the patch of land: in
two or three years, the boys will be able to do something. I can't
teach them much; but I can teach them to fear God. We must get on how
we can, and put our trust in Him who is a father to the fatherless."

With such thoughts running in his head, Jacob arrived at the cottage,
and found the children outside the door, watching for him. They all
hastened to him, and the dog rushed before them, to welcome his master.
"Down, Smoker, good dog! Well, Mr. Edward, I have been as quick as I
could. How have Mr. Humphrey and your sisters behaved I But we must not
remain outside to-day, for the troopers are scouring the forest, and
may see you. Let us come in directly, for it would not do that they
should come here."

"Will they burn the cottage down?" inquired Alice, as she took Jacob's
hand.

"Yes, my dear, I think they would, if they found that you and your
brothers were in it; but we must not let them see you."

They all entered the cottage, which consisted of one large room in
front, and two back rooms for bedrooms. There was also a third bedroom,
which was behind the other two, but which had not any furniture in it.

"Now, let's see what we can have for dinner--there's venison left, I
know," said Jacob; "come, we must all be useful. Who will be cook?"

"I will be cook," said Alice, "if you will show me how."

"So you shall, my dear," said Jacob, "and I will show you how. There's
some potatoes in the basket in the corner, and some onions hanging on
the string; we must have some water--who will fetch it?"

"I will," said Edward, who took a pail, and went out to the spring.

The potatoes were peeled and washed by the children--Jacob and Edward
cut the venison into pieces--the iron pot was cleaned; and then the
meat and potatoes put with water into the pot, and placed on the fire.

"Now I'll cut up the onions, for they will make your eyes water."

"I don't care," said Humphrey, "I'll cut and cry at the same time."

And Humphrey took up a knife, and cut away most manfully, although he
was obliged to wipe his eyes with his sleeve very often.

"You are a fine fellow, Humphrey," said Jacob. "Now we'll put the
onions in, and let it all boil up together. Now you see, you have
cooked your own dinner; ain't that pleasant?"

"Yes," cried they all; "and we will eat our own dinners as soon as it
is ready."

"Then, Humphrey, you must get some of the platters down which are on
the drawer; and, Alice, you will find some knives in the drawer. And
let me see, what can little Edith do? Oh, she can go to the cupboard
and find the salt-cellar. Edward, just look out, and if you see any
body coming or passing, let me know. We must put you on guard till the
troopers leave the forest."

The children set about their tasks, and Humphrey cried out, as he very
often did, "Now, this is jolly!"

While the dinner was cooking, Jacob amused the children by showing them
how to put things in order; the floor was swept, the hearth was made
tidy. He shewed Alice how to wash out a cloth, and Humphrey how to dust
the chairs. They all worked merrily, while little Edith stood and
clapped her hands.

But just before dinner was ready, Edward came in and said, "Here are
troopers galloping in the forest!" Jacob went out, and observed that
they were coming in a direction that would lead near to the cottage.

He walked in, and, after a moment's thought, he said, "My dear
children, those men may come and search the cottage; you must do as I
tell you, and mind that you are very quiet. Humphrey, you and your
sisters must go to bed, and pretend to be very ill. Edward, take off
your coat and put on this old hunting-frock of mine. You must be in the
bedroom attending your sick brother and sisters. Come, Edith, dear, you
must play at going to bed, and have your dinner afterward."

Jacob took the children into the bedroom, and, removing the upper
dress, which would have betrayed that they were not the children of
poor people, put them in bed, and covered them up to the chins with the
clothes. Edward had put on the old hunting-shirt, which came below his
knees, and stood with a mug of water in his hand by the bedside of the
two girls. Jacob went to the outer room, to remove the platters laid
knees, and stood with a mug of water in his hand by the bedside of the