Project Gutenberg's The Children of the New Forest, by Captain Marryat
The circumstances which I am about to relate to my juvenile readers
took place in the year 1647. By referring to the history of England, of
that date, they will find that King Charles the First, against whom the
Commons of England had rebelled, after a civil war of nearly five
years, had been defeated, and was confined as a prisoner at Hampton

Edward then returned to the other room, and recollected, or, rather,
was reminded, that he had had no supper, and it was now nearly dawn of
and never discover such a hiding-place." Edward walked round by the
side of the thicket, to find out the track by which the robbers had
"He still sleeps, I believe. The question is, whether you should ride
over with the pony, or walk, and leave Pablo to return with the pony
and cart; for I will not take the boy away, or leave the house myself,
without removing the property which belongs to the boy, and of which I
will make inquiry when he awakes. Besides, there is money, by what the
robbers stated in my hearing, which of course must be taken care of for
him."
"By whose hand did that man fall?" said the intendant.
Edward and Pablo pulled the body of the robber on one side of the
doorway, and threw over it some dried fern which lay by; they then
backed the cart down to the door; the iron chest was first got in, then
all the heavy articles, such as armor, guns, and books, etc., and by
that time the cart was more than half loaded. Edward then went into the
chamber, and brought out the packages the boy had made up, and put them
all in the cart until it was loaded high up; they brought out some
blankets, and laid over all to keep things steady; and then Edward told
the boy that all was ready, and that they had better go.
"Then listen to me: your father is safe from all persecution now; he
is, I trust, in heaven; and you they can not touch, as you have done
nothing to offend them; but still they will take possession of your
father's property as soon as they know of his death, and find out who
he was. This, for your sake I wish to prevent them from doing, and have
therefore sent for the cart, that I may remove to my cottage every
Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:
thing that is of value, that it may be held for your benefit; some day
if he could be of service to Mrs. Beverley. The colonel would have
persuaded Jacob to have altogether taken up his residence at the
mansion, but to this the old man objected. He had been all his life
under the greenwood tree, and could not bear to leave the forest. He
promised the colonel that he would watch over his family, and ever be
at hand when required; and he kept his word. The death of Colonel
"If born and bred in this forest, James Southwold," said the leader of
the troop, "you must fain know all its mazes and paths. Now, call to
mind, are there no secret hiding-places in which people may remain
concealed; no thickets which may cover both man and horse? Peradventure
thou mayest point out the very spot where this man Charles may be
hidden?"
"I do know one dell, within a mile of Arnwood," replied James
Southwold, "which might cover double our troop from the eyes of the
most wary."
"We will ride there, then," replied the leader. "Arnwood, sayest thou?
is not that the property of the Malignant Cavalier Beverley, who was
shot down at Naseby?"
"Even so," replied Southwold; "and many is the time--that is, in the
olden time, before I was regenerated--many is the day of revelry that I
have passed there; many the cup of good ale that I have quaffed."
Before Jacob is admitted to the presence of Miss Judith Villiers, we
must give some account of the establishment at Arnwood. With the
exception of one male servant, who officiated in the house and stable
as his services might be required, every man of the household of
Colonel Beverley had followed the fortunes of their master, and as none
had returned, they, in all probability had shared his fate. Three
female servants, with the man above mentioned, composed the whole
household. Indeed, there was every reason for not increasing the
establishment, for the rents were either paid in part, or not paid at
all. It was generally supposed that the property, now that the
"So I should presume, Jacob Armitage, neither shall I accept your
offer. It would ill befit the dignity of a Villiers to be frightened
out of her abode by a party of rude soldiers. Happen what will, I shall
not stir from this--no, not even from this chair. Neither do I consider
the danger so great as you suppose. Let Benjamin saddle, and be
prepared to ride over to Lymington immediately. I will give him a
letter to the magistrate there, who will send us protection."
"But, madam, the children can not remain here. I will not leave them
here. I promised the colonel--"
"Well, then, be it so; take them to your cottage, and take Martha to
attend upon the Miss Beverleys. Go down now, and desire Agatha to come
to me, and Benjamin to saddle as fast as he can."
Jacob left the room, satisfied with the permission to remove the
children. He knew that it was useless to argue with Miss Judith, who
was immovable when once she had declared her intentions. He was
debating in his own mind whether he should acquaint the servants with
the threatened danger; but he had no occasion to do so, for Agatha had
remained at the door while Jacob was communicating the intelligence,
and as soon as he had arrived at that portion of it by which she
learned that the mansion was to be burned down that night, had run off
to the kitchen to communicate the intelligence to the other servants.
"I'll not stay to be burned to death," exclaimed the cook, as Jacob
came in. "Well, Mr. Armitage, this is pretty news you have brought.
What does my lady say!"
"She desires that Benjamin saddles immediately, to carry a letter to
Lymington; and you, Agatha, are to go up stairs to her."
"But what does she mean to do? Where are we to go?" exclaimed Agatha.
"Miss Judith intends to remain where she is."
"Then she will remain alone, for me," exclaimed the housemaid, who was
admired by Benjamin. "Its bad enough to have little victuals and no
wages, but as for being burned to death--Benjamin, put a pillion behind
your saddle, and I'll go to Lymington with you. I won't be long in
getting my bundle."